# Where do libraries fit in?

For a long time, libraries have helped their communities discover and understand civic data. Libraries have also historically played roles when such data could be collected and preserved. But recent developments around local civic open data have presented an opportunity -- we would say a need -- for library workers to be much more directly involved in the entire distributed ecosystem of open data publication, use, and stewardship. This will take us beyond our library buildings, and involve relationships with people who may not consider themselves library users. This is a good thing!

One enduring strength of libraries is that they are local community anchors. Although there is a lot of civic open data available, there is a lot of variation in -- just for starters -- how is it published, who is supported to use it, and how is it stewarded. There's not one way to do it, and the form of a strong civic open data ecosystem will necessarily vary from place to place. This is a fantastic opportunity -- it's at the local level that the most innovative and forward-looking ideas around open data are developing. Libraries are firmly connected to local communities and practice; libraries and their workers should be helping to lead the development of their own civic data ecosystems.

Moreover, the act of publishing data alone is not likely to result in community impact. Data intermediaries \([read more in our next section!](../defining-a-data-intermediary.md)\) are entities that help the public to apply and use open data to achieve impact by building relationships among publishers, users, and other members of the ecosystem, improving data, statistical, and technological literacy, enhancing data quality, providing feedback mechanisms to publishers, and building tools that enable broader data use. Sound familiar? Libraries and librarians should act as core data intermediaries; their expertise adds value to a wide range of issues that affect both data publishers and users.

But a key point for libraries is that this work is not conducted alone. Cultivating a healthy local civic data ecosystem \([more on that coming up, too!](../mapping-your-ecosystem.md)\) depends upon the coordinated efforts of a variety of data intermediaries. No single entity can effectively cover all of the necessary roles. As your library works in its own ecosystem, it can learn about other players and entities -- our project provides guidance on this ecosystem mapping -- and where possible take roles that compliment and strengthen existing capacity. This process has many benefits for your community \(especially if you can make the process participatory and inclusive\) as well as your institution.

Finally, getting involved with civic data probably already aligns with your library mission. Your library probably already considers data literacy as increasingly important for its staff and community to cultivate. It is also likely to consider community engagement, specifically working to strengthen its communities, equally important. Because it's a good strategy for addressing tough problems \(and because funding is often tight\), collaborating with strategic partners may be a point of emphasis. Developing your library's role in its civic data ecosystem can address all of these goals.

